<<header| =Migrating to new module names>>

Starting with Eliom 13, Ocsigen Server 8, Ocsigen Toolkit 5, and
Ocsigen Start 9, all Ocsigen projects use hierarchical module names:

|=Old name|=New name|
|{{{Eliom_service}}}|{{{Eliom.Service}}}|
|{{{Eliom_content}}}|{{{Eliom.Content}}}|
|{{{Eliom_registration}}}|{{{Eliom.Registration}}}|
|{{{Eliom_parameter}}}|{{{Eliom.Parameter}}}|
|{{{Ot_popup}}}|{{{Ot.Popup}}}|
|{{{Ot_carousel}}}|{{{Ot.Carousel}}}|
|{{{Os_session}}}|{{{Os.Session}}}|
|{{{Os_user}}}|{{{Os.User}}}|
|{{{Ocsigen_extensions}}}|{{{Ocsigen.Extensions}}}|
|{{{Ocsigen_config}}}|{{{Ocsigen.Config}}}|
|{{{Ocsigen_lib}}}|{{{Ocsigen_base.Lib}}}|

==Using compatibility packages==

To migrate progressively, you can use the compatibility packages.
They provide the old module names as aliases to the new ones, so
your existing code compiles without changes.

Install the compat packages you need:

<<code language="shell"|
opam install eliom-compat ocsigenserver-compat \
  ocsigen-toolkit-compat ocsigen-start-compat
>>

Then add them to the {{{(libraries ...)}}} in your {{{dune}}} file:

<<code language="lisp"|
; Server library
(libraries
  eliom.server
  eliom-compat.server
  ocsigenserver-compat
  ocsigenserver-compat.baselib
  ocsigen-start.server
  ocsigen-start-compat.server
  ocsigen-toolkit-compat.server
  ...)

; Client executable or library
(libraries
  eliom.client
  eliom-compat.client
  ocsigen-start-compat.client
  ocsigen-toolkit-compat.client
  ...)
>>

Your code will compile as before, using the old module names.

==Migrating your code==

Once the compat packages are in place, you can migrate your code
file by file, replacing old names with new ones. When a file is
fully migrated, you can remove the compat libraries it depended on.

The following renaming patterns apply:

* **Eliom**: {{{Eliom_xxx}}} becomes {{{Eliom.Xxx}}}
  (e.g. {{{Eliom_content.Html.F}}} → {{{Eliom.Content.Html.F}}})

* **Ocsigen Server**: {{{Ocsigen_xxx}}} becomes {{{Ocsigen.Xxx}}}
  (e.g. {{{Ocsigen_extensions.Configuration}}} → {{{Ocsigen.Extensions.Configuration}}})

* **Ocsigen Server baselib**: {{{Ocsigen_lib}}} becomes {{{Ocsigen_base.Lib}}},
  {{{Ocsigen_cache}}} becomes {{{Ocsigen_base.Cache}}}

* **Ocsigen Toolkit**: {{{Ot_xxx}}} becomes {{{Ot.Xxx}}}
  (e.g. {{{Ot_popup.popup}}} → {{{Ot.Popup.popup}}})

* **Ocsigen Start**: {{{Os_xxx}}} becomes {{{Os.Xxx}}}
  (e.g. {{{Os_session.connected_fun}}} → {{{Os.Session.connected_fun}}})

A few modules keep their old name because of conflicts with
other libraries:
* {{{Eliom.Eliom_react}}} (conflict with {{{react}}} library)
* {{{Eliom.Eliom_form}}} (conflict with {{{js_of_ocaml}}})
* {{{Eliom.Eliom_lazy}}} (conflict with {{{Stdlib.Lazy}}})
* {{{Eliom.Eliom_uri}}} (conflict with {{{uri}}} library)

==={{{module type of}}} on wrapped modules===

Because the new module names live inside a dune-wrapped library, OCaml's
type strengthening exposes the internal mangled prefix
({{{Eliom__Content.Html.D}}} rather than {{{Eliom.Content.Html.D}}})
when you use {{{module type of}}}. As a consequence, code like

<<code language="ocaml"|
module Make (A : module type of Eliom_content.Html.F) = struct ... end
module D = Make (Eliom_content.Html.D)
>>

stops type-checking, even with {{{eliom-compat}}} installed: the
functor parameter type and the application argument become
incompatible, with errors mentioning {{{Eliom__Content.Html...}}}.

To work around this, Eliom now exposes named module types that
{{{eliom-compat}}} re-exports under the legacy paths:

* {{{Eliom.Content.Html.T}}} (alias: {{{Eliom_content.Html.T}}})

Use them instead of {{{module type of}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
module Make (A : Eliom_content.Html.T) = struct ... end
module D = Make (Eliom_content.Html.D)
>>

This is the same pattern adopted internally by {{{Ot.Icons.Make}}}.

===Top-level values cannot be shimmed===

{{{eliom-compat}}} can re-export legacy module names but not
top-level values of the wrapper module itself: dune's auto-generated
wrapper module can only contain submodules, not {{{val}}} declarations.
You must update such call sites by hand:

* {{{Eliom.run ()}}} → {{{Eliom.App.run ()}}}

===Other changes===

* {{{ocsigen-i18n}}} 5.0 now adds {{{[@@deriving json]}}} automatically
  in {{{--eliom}}} mode. Remove any {{{sed}}} hack that was adding it
  manually.
* {{{ocsigen-i18n-generator}}} reads its TSV input from stdin in
  {{{--eliom}}} mode. In {{{dune}}} rules, pipe the input via
  {{{(with-stdin-from %{deps} (run ocsigen-i18n-generator --eliom ...))}}}
  rather than passing it as a positional argument.
